SLIDE 1.
Sophia A. Nazarova (St-Petersburg State University, Russian State Pedagogical University, Floating Marine Research Center)
Nikolay V. Maximovich (St-Petersburg State University)

Linear growth of Macoma balthica (North Atlantic and Arctic Oceans).


SLIDE 2.
Macoma balthica is a common bivalve species at mud-sand tidal and shallow subtidal sites in boreal zone.

This species lives at Atlantic coast of Europe from France to Murmansk coast of the Barents sea and at Atlantic coast of the North America from Georgia state to Labrador.

At first we investigate Macoma balthica growth in the Barents sea populations. Expeditions was in 2007-2008 years, and it's our original data. We test two hypothesys:
1. At the west sites Macoma balthica growth rate is lower than at the east sites, because of smaller impact of Nord-cap stream.
2. At the low tidal level Macoma balthica growth rate is higher than at middle and high levels, because of more time for feeding.

Then we want to compare Macoma growth rate at the Barents sea with other places. 

There are paper by J. J. Beukema and B.W. Meehan where they investigate latitudional variation in Macoma balthica linear growth by constatnt k from von Bertalanffy equation (Beukema J. J., Meehan B. W. Latitudinal variation in linear growth and over shell characteristics of Macoma balthica // Marine biology. Vol. 85. 1985. P. 27–33.). We use another method to compare Macoma balthica growth rates in different sites of Altantic and Arctic oceans.


SLIDE 3.
The growth rate of M.balthica was determined by the width of annual growth ring of the shells and describe the growth of M.balthica shell by von Bertalanffy equation. 
To compare the growth curves, we analyzed the residual dispersion (Allen, 1976). We adopted F/Fcrit ratio (significance level a < 0.05) as an index of distance after Maximovich (1989). Values of F/Fcr < 1 (a = 0.05) indicate that differences between compared age curves are random.


SLIDE 4.
The growth of Macoma balthica was studied in 7 tidal sites at the Murmansk coast of the Barents Sea: cape Abram, bays Pala, Gavrilovo, Yarnyshnaya, Dalne-Zeleneckaya, Shelpino, Porchnikha. 


SLIDE 5.
We get 14 growth description -- one description for each tide level of investigated sites.

Maximum life span was observed at the middle tide level of Gavrilovo bay - 15 years (when shell length was from 15.6 to 18.8 mm). 
Maximum shell length was observed at thi high tide level of Yarnyshnaya bay - 20.3 mm (at 13 years).


SLIDE 6.
After analysis 3 groups of M. balthica with different patterns of growth were identified. The highest growth rate was recorded for middle tidle level of Yarnyshnaya and Porchnikha bays. 
Distance between this group and other was maximum (F/Fкр. = 2.7). 

In the second group there were mollusks from high tidal level of Dalne-Zeleneckaya and Yarnyshnaya bays, middle tidal level of Pala, Dalne-Zeleneckaya and Shelpino bays and from low tidal level of Gavrilovo bay.
Mean growth rate in this group was 19.3 mm in 13 years.

In the third group there were mollusks from high tidal level of Shelpino bay, middle tidal level of cape Abram and Gavrilovo bays and from low tidal level of cape Abram, Pala and Yarnyshnaya bays. Mean growth rate in this group was 16.4 mm in 14 years.

As a result, we found no geographical or altitude patterns in group distribution when we investigate mean growth rate for all generation at each site.


SLIDE 7.
Then we take annual growth of generations as observation and site and tide level as factors for ANOVA. Also we use mean start length in age group as third factor because of decreasing growth rate in ontogenesis. 


   На первом этапе анализа (факторы «горизонт литорали», «начальный средний раз-
мер особей в возрастной группе») установлено (табл. 3, I), что каждая из назначенных
причин вариации достоверно определяет величину годового прироста. Весьма приме-
чательно, что при этом наибольшая доля вариации величин годового прироста опре-
деляется не начальным размером маком (SS = 4,74), а мареографическим уровнем
положения станции (SS = 11,98).
   При анализе структуры вариансы исходного комплекса в градиентах начального
среднего размера особей в возрастной группе и географии местообитаний выяснилось,
что достоверное влияние на величину среднего годового прироста маком оказывают
также оба фактора (табл. 3, II). Причем и в этом случае наибольшая доля вариации
обусловлена не начальным размером раковины, а фактором «участок» (SS = 14,44).



SLIDE 8.
We also used measurements of the width of annual growth ring from Atlantic coast of the North America: Rand Harbor (Massachusets) (Gilbert, 1974), Hudsons Bay (Manitoba) (Green, from Gilbert, 1974), Cobscook Bay (Maine) (Commito, 1982), Winsdor (Bay of Fundy) (Turk et al., 1980), St.Laurence River (Quebek) (Lavoie, 1960; Vincent et al.,1989); and from Atlantic coast of Europe: H75 (Baltic Sea) (Venne & Klusek, 1985), Tvarminne area (Baltic Sea) (Vogel, 1959), Finland Gulf (Baltic Sea) (Segerstrale, 1960), Tvaren Bay (Baltic Sea) (Bergh, 1974), Le Verdon and Phare de Richard (Gironde Estuary) (Bachelet, 1980), North Sea (Vogel, 1959), Klushiha bay and strait Sukhaya salma (White sea) (Maximovich et al., 1992), Ermolinskaya Bay (White Sea) (Semenova, 1970).


SLIDE 9.

We take this picture. It's very difficult to understand something on this picture without formal analysis. Here dirrefent colours mean different regions.

SLIDE 10.
After analysis 9 groups of M. balthica with different patterns of growth were identified. The highest growth rate was recorded for Rand Harbor (23.1 mm in 6 years) and the least for Ermolinskaya Bay (15.5 mm in 30 years). At Ermolinskaya Bay we also observed the longest lifespan of M. balthica (30 years).

Shells comprising every other group were found in several locations. We found no latitudinal or longitudinal patterns in their distribution. These results are in contradiction with J. J. Beukema and B.W. Meehan (1985) data. The latter authors proposed negative correlation between latitude and M. balthica growth rate.

Contrary to expectations, exposure time during the tide cycle does not affect the growth rate of M.balthica. Factors acting at the local level are of more importance to its growth, than climate. One may speculate that such local factors are feeding conditions.


SLIDE 11.



Clusters:
Rand Harbor 

Hudsons Bay
H75
Le Verdon mid
Le Verdon high
Phare de Richard
Tvarminne area
North Sea
Cobscook Bay
St.Laurence low
Finland Gulf 6m
Klushiha low zostera

Sukhaya mid
Yarnyshnaya mid
Sukhaya low zostera
Sukhaya low 

Klushiha low
Klushiha mid
St.Laurence mid
Dalnezeleneckaya mid
St.Laurence high

Ermolinskaya

St.Laurence River
Winsdor

Tvaren Bay
Shelpino mid
Gavrilovo mid
Shelpino high

Dalnezeleneckaya high
Gavrilovo low

Abram low
Yarnyshnaya low

